---
layout: post
title:  "A friendlier visualization of Java's JIT compiler based on control flow"
date:   2022-05-24
tags: []
---

The [previous
post](https://robcasloz.github.io/blog/2021/04/22/improving-the-ideal-graph-visualizer.html)
introduced the [Ideal Graph
Visualizer](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/tree/master/src/utils/IdealGraphVisualizer)
(IGV), a tool to visualize the inner workings of
[OpenJDK](https://openjdk.java.net/)'s main just-in-time compiler. This post
focuses on a new IGV feature, to be released in OpenJDK 19, to make it easier
for compiler experts to maintain and extend the compiler and for advanced Java
users to get a grasp of it.

#### The rough sea of nodes

OpenJDK's main just-in-time (JIT) compiler, called
[C2](http://www.usenix.org/events/jvm01/full_papers/paleczny/paleczny.pdf),
represents the program under compilation using a [program dependence
graph](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/24039.24041) (PDG). In a PDG, nodes
correspond to operations and edges correspond to dependencies among operations.
The distinguishing feature of PDGs is that they unify data and control: nodes
correspond to ordinary arithmetic/logic operations but also to control
operations such as conditional jumps and loops. The PDG flavor used in C2 is
often referred to as the
["sea-of-nodes"](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/202530.202534). This is the PDG
of a simple loop with two exits:

![PDG of a simple loop with two exits]({{site.url}}/assets/pdg-loop.png){:width="55%" .center-image}

{:.image-caption}
*PDG of a simple loop with two exits*

The unified nature of the sea-of-nodes representation [eases the implementation
of a number of optimizations](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/202530.202534), but
has a significant drawback: even graphs corresponding to relatively small
programs turn quickly into a tangle (a "sea of nodes") that is quite difficult
to grasp. In the [words of John
Rose](http://cr.openjdk.java.net/~jrose/draft/code-media.html), one of the main
architects of the OpenJDK's virtual machine: *"Engineers (...) usually cannot
read PDG graphs directly without assistance; this affects debugging speed"*.

#### From program dependence graphs to control-flow graphs

The most commonly used program representation in compilers is probably the good
old control-flow graph (CFG). In a CFG, nodes correspond to basic blocks
(sequences of operations that are always executed together) and edges correspond
to control jumps across basic blocks. Unlike PDGs, CFGs explicitly assign a
basic block to each operation and order the operations within each basic block.
This increases the complexity of several compiler optimizations, but yields a
structured, sequential view of the program that is easier to understand and
debug. Furthermore, CFGs are a familiar abstraction for many systems engineers,
whereas PDGs remain an obscure topic in advanced compiler courses.

Inspired by feedback gathered from many C2 engineers across different
organizations and by [John Rose's call to
arms](http://cr.openjdk.java.net/~jrose/draft/code-media.html) (*"Even in a PDG,
debugging presentations can easily include trial schedules to be competitive
with CFG presentations"*), I have developed a [new IGV
view](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/pull/7817) that presents C2's PDG-based
program representation as a CFG. The new IGV view computes its own "trial
schedule", including an assignment of operations to basic blocks (global
schedule) and an ordering of operations within each basic block (local
schedule). The trial schedule is replaced by C2's actual schedule when this
becomes available during the last compilation phases of C2. This is the classic
PDG view and the new CFG view of a simple method:

![PDG and CFG of a tiny Java method]({{site.url}}/assets/pdg-cfg-method.png)

{:.image-caption}
*PDG (left) and CFG (right) of a tiny Java method*

#### Trying it out

If you want to explore further, you can try out the new view using the above
example in a few simple steps:

1. Download the [OpenJDK source code](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk) (IGV
builds are not distributed with the JDK):

   ```
   wget https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/archive/refs/heads/master.zip
   unzip master.zip
   ```

2. Build IGV using Maven:

   ```
   cd jdk-master/src/utils/IdealGraphVisualizer
   mvn install
   ```

3. Run IGV:

   ```
   sh igv.sh
   ```

4. Open [this IGV graph file]({{site.url}}/assets/example.xml) (`File` â†’ `Open...`).

   To produce your own graph file `foo.xml` instead, run a debug build of the
   virtual machine with the options `-XX:PrintIdealGraphLevel=3
   -XX:PrintIdealGraphFile=foo.xml`. See [IGV's usage
   instructions](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/blob/master/src/utils/IdealGraphVisualizer/README.md#usage)
   for more detail.

5. In the `Outline` window, expand the `example graphs` group and double-click
on `graph`. By default, the PDG view is shown.

6. Switch to the CFG view by clicking on the following Toolbar button:

![CFG button]({{site.url}}/assets/cfg-button.png){: .center-image}

Now that you have a copy of IGV's source code on your hands, it is a good moment
to remind that there are multiple ["starter"
tasks](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/issues/?jql=labels%20%3D%20c2-igv%20AND%20labels%20%3D%20starter%20AND%20%28status%20%3D%20open%20OR%20status%20%3D%20new%29%20AND%20assignee%20%3D%20null)
proposed to improve the tool, and [contributions are
welcome](https://youtu.be/bHcKTYy_Nec)! Hacking IGV is a friendly way of
learning how C2 works and getting your hands on the OpenJDK project in general.

#### Possible extensions

Are CFGs the final word in compiler visualization? Hardly! There are many ways
in which IGV could be extended to make it more useful for compiler developers.
Here are some ideas:

- *Visualizing program regions.* Programs have more structure than raw
basic blocks. IGV could improve top-down exploration by clustering basic blocks
into (nested) loops, if-then-else structures, etc.

- *Estimating execution frequencies.* Basic block execution frequencies can
provide a very powerful visual aid to quickly identify the program regions that
"matter" (basic blocks that are executed most often). Currently, IGV colors
blocks by execution frequency only if the information is provided as part of the
input, but it could be extended to perform the analysis itself, similarly to how
it is done with scheduling information.

![CFG colored by execution frequency (cold blocks in blue, hot blocks in red)]({{site.url}}/assets/cfg-frequencies.png){:width="60%" .center-image}

{:.image-caption}
*CFG colored by execution frequency (cold blocks in blue, hot blocks in red)*

- *Visualizing CFG-based compilers.* Until now, IGV had been limited to
compilers using a PDG representation, but thanks to the new view, CFG-based
compilers (for example C1, OpenJDK's lightweight JIT compiler), could also
benefit from it.

#### Other improvements in JDK 19

Besides introducing the new CFG view, IGV has been [upgraded to JDK
17](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/pull/7347) and made faster than ever
(bringing in average speedups of 15x and 2.4x for
[scheduling](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/pull/8037) and
[viewing](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/pull/8073) graphs).

If you have feedback, questions, or want to discuss any of the above ideas,
[talk to me](https://robcasloz.github.io/contact.html)!

{:.acks}
**Acknowledgements**: thanks to Jesper Wilhelmsson and Vladimir Kozlov for
providing feedback on an earlier version of this post.
